Hello, everyone.
NOTE CONF
Hi.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
There is a slight technical difficulty with one of the
projectors.
NOTE CONF
I've asked for help.
So could you just maybe wait one minute or, uh.
NOTE CONF
And then I'll, uh, we'll see what's happening.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Thank you for your patience.
Okay, so while we're waiting, let's just introduce ourselves.
NOTE CONF
So my name is Lily, and I'll be your lecturer
for this week, which is week two of calculus and
NOTE CONF
its applications, where we will, uh, explore limits and continuity.
Um, so I have a list of questions for you.
NOTE CONF
So by now you know how this class works.
We ask you questions and you think about them, you
NOTE CONF
discuss with your peers, and then we figure out an
answer together.
NOTE CONF
Um, so.
Well, uh, as I already told you, one of the,
NOTE CONF
uh, projectors is not working.
So I will have to alternate between, uh, Wook lab
NOTE CONF
and slides on just one, uh, one projector.
Uh, so sorry about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, let me just, um, reset everything.
And I can, uh.
NOTE CONF
All right.
But you don't see the statement, do you?
NOTE CONF
Or.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Nope.
You don't see the statement.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm sorry about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have the following statement.
So is it true or false?
NOTE CONF
And now I have to put back the the the
the the the, um, uh, options for you.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So once again, I'll show you the question.
Or maybe like this.
NOTE CONF
Oh, that is better, isn't it?
I think that's better.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Why does it say you cannot vote anymore?
I don't understand that.
NOTE CONF
Can you click on the link?
Oh, uh, sorry about that.
NOTE CONF
I did something which prevents you from voting, which is
really annoying.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry.
Um, how about if I reset the whole thing?
NOTE CONF
Maybe that will help.
Yeah, but the.
NOTE CONF
Problem is, we also saw the right answer.
You did?
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, sorry about that.
I don't know what's going on today.
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
Well.
NOTE CONF
I am.
I am confused here, but.
NOTE CONF
Sure.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Um, again, I only have one screen, so I will
NOTE CONF
have to switch this one to the visualiser.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And what did we have there?
We had the limit of.
NOTE CONF
SD goes to zero of one over t.
Minus.
NOTE CONF
S t.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So the question is.
Is this limit equal to one?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Let me.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what do we do with, uh, expressions like these?
NOTE CONF
So first of all, let's, uh, notice that naively plugging
in zero doesn't quite work.
NOTE CONF
You know, you could be tempted to say that each
of these.
NOTE CONF
You can, uh, if you if I only had limit
of one over t s t goes to zero here.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, then you have a result in your book
which says that this should be infinity, right?
NOTE CONF
However, doing the same thing with the other fraction will
also give you.
NOTE CONF
Infinity.
And then you're stuck with something like infinity minus infinity.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that is something that you will soon learn
is called is it?
NOTE CONF
Oh, yes.
Thank you so much.
NOTE CONF
It's called an indeterminate form.
So whatever you wanted to do, maybe we're tempted to
NOTE CONF
do.
Doesn't quite work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But luckily, there's always another way.
NOTE CONF
Is it working now?
Thank you so much.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I just didn't come on at the start.
NOTE CONF
It didn't come off, but.
Yeah, it's just it was just cooling.
NOTE CONF
I tried to switch everything off and on, but it
still didn't work.
NOTE CONF
I had to.
Just use a remote, and it's overridden the cooling.
NOTE CONF
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, now we have two screens.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but still, let's, uh, let's finish this question.
Actually, you know what?
NOTE CONF
If we have two screens, why not use it?
So now you can see the the question on one
NOTE CONF
of the screens and the solution on the other.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So as I said, this naive approach does not work.
But what what does work?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Uh, the following principle, like in your, uh, in your
NOTE CONF
book, you have this, uh, approach of, um, using a
function which is, uh, which agrees with your function everywhere
NOTE CONF
except the problematic point, and they should have the same
limits at that point.
NOTE CONF
So what does that imply for us?
What it implies for us is that we can, uh.
NOTE CONF
We can, uh, algebraically manipulate this expression, which is a
fancy way of saying.
NOTE CONF
Compute the this difference.
So, so what we need is to.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You can see everything, right?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I just do my regular, um, my regular, uh,
NOTE CONF
manipulations with fractions Actions.
And what does this tell me?
NOTE CONF
It tells me that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well.
Okay, so this is what I'm doing.
NOTE CONF
And what I'm using here is this principle that if
you're if you have two functions.
NOTE CONF
So I'm talking about this function and this function which
agree everywhere except this problematic point t.
NOTE CONF
Sorry zero.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So I could only cancel t.
With, with the condition that t is not zero.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So these two agree everywhere except t equals zero.
NOTE CONF
And then they still they should have the same limit
at t equals zero, right?
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is actually enough if it's, if it holds
on an open interval around zero.
NOTE CONF
But here it actually holds everywhere.
So we're fine.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well but this one now you can actually compute by
NOTE CONF
direct substitution right.
You can just put plug zero in here and you
NOTE CONF
get one.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we had this expression right.
And we realised that we cannot just naively plug in
NOTE CONF
zero because we get infinity minus infinity.
Not good.
NOTE CONF
But what we could do instead is to by some
algebraic manipulation, we could reduce it to a function which
NOTE CONF
agrees with our, uh, with the function we started with
everywhere Except zero, and that we can use that to
NOTE CONF
deduce that they should have the same limit at zero,
which is one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, sorry about the, uh, the, um.
Something went wrong with a woo club in the beginning.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully the next attempt will be more successful.
And so something I'll do is I'll reset everything again.
NOTE CONF
And hopefully this will not mess up anything.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
I think now this works.
NOTE CONF
I'll give you a couple of minutes to think about
it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
All right.
NOTE CONF
We have an overwhelming support for, uh, for falls.
So.
NOTE CONF
Indeed.
You're right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but let's let's see.
Why is that?
NOTE CONF
Why is that the case?
So.
NOTE CONF
Well, again, we do this.
Uh, how do we approach a question like this?
NOTE CONF
Well, it kind of similarly to the previous one, but,
uh, you know, there will be slight differences.
NOTE CONF
So we have limit as x goes to minus one
of the expression x squared plus two x plus one
NOTE CONF
and divided by x to the fourth minus one.
Oh sorry.
NOTE CONF
You don't see that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well what do we do.
We again manipulate this algebraically.
NOTE CONF
Into the following.
So we recognise hopefully that this is x plus one
NOTE CONF
squared divided by x to the fourth minus one.
But we can factorise that right.
NOTE CONF
We can factorise that into the following expression which we
can factorise further.
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now.
Well, you see again, plugging a minus one n on
NOTE CONF
top would give us zero, and on the bottom would
also give us zero.
NOTE CONF
So we would just plug it.
Well what was that.
NOTE CONF
I don't know either.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we would, uh, we would obtain an expression of
NOTE CONF
the form zero divided by zero, which is yet another
indeterminate form.
NOTE CONF
But we don't do that.
We use this principle of that.
NOTE CONF
We used in the previous example that if expressions agree
except one point on some open interval, then they will
NOTE CONF
have the same limit at that point.
And that's, that means we can just, uh, we can
NOTE CONF
just divide by x plus one, I divide by x
plus one.
NOTE CONF
And what I get here well is a nice expression
no longer.
NOTE CONF
So there is no longer any nothing gives you zero
in the denominator anymore.
NOTE CONF
And we can just plug minus one in and compute
that will give us that will give us zero divided
NOTE CONF
by something doesn't matter which is not infinity or zero.
Well, that gives you zero, so it is indeed not
NOTE CONF
infinity.
So you were correct about this question.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So now we will switch to a slightly different kind
NOTE CONF
of question.
So I have to ask you, do you have any
NOTE CONF
questions about this or the previous question.
Because they used kind of a similar principle.
NOTE CONF
And in the next question we will move on to
something else.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions about this one or the previous
one?
NOTE CONF
Um, no, there are no questions and most of you
chose the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
So I will just, uh, I will move on.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
The we have a slight.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
No, it's all right.
I can manage that.
NOTE CONF
So.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
On the on one screen, you have a picture, right?
NOTE CONF
And it has.
It's, uh, it depicts a function.
NOTE CONF
Please be careful about what all these things mean.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You can see that it's.
You know, it's not a it's kind of broken down
NOTE CONF
a little bit.
There are some, uh, coloured circles and some not coloured
NOTE CONF
circles.
Uh, be conscious of what those things mean when you
NOTE CONF
answer that question.
I'll give you a couple of minutes here.
NOTE CONF
Let's.
Take.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so, uh, not everyone has voted, but I
think voting has more or less stopped.
NOTE CONF
So I think it makes sense to discuss this question
together.
NOTE CONF
So.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, you most of you are correct.
NOTE CONF
So let's go through these, uh, options together.
What is happening?
NOTE CONF
Uh, so first of all, let's look at the, uh,
the picture.
NOTE CONF
What is happening on the picture?
Uh, you have some sort of function which kind of
NOTE CONF
has a little jump or two.
Right?
NOTE CONF
And it's not.
It's not defined at point four.
NOTE CONF
So just be be aware of the fact that when
you have that little circle which is not coloured in,
NOTE CONF
that means that you can stop the discussion for a
moment.
NOTE CONF
The discussion is for when we are answering the question.
So those circles that are not coloured in, they.
NOTE CONF
Are.
Can you please be quiet?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That means that, uh, the the the the the function's
NOTE CONF
value is not given at those points.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So what is this first thing here?
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
What is this first expression here?
Can you see this?
NOTE CONF
Well, this is the limit of the function as x
approaches two on the left.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Does everyone agree with that?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So?
NOTE CONF
So two is here.
I approach two from the left.
NOTE CONF
This limit exists, right?
This limit exists.
NOTE CONF
So everything's fine.
What is this expression?
NOTE CONF
Just somebody you can just shout.
Yes, please.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
So it's the limit of this function as x approaches
NOTE CONF
two from the right and it does exist.
Two right.
NOTE CONF
Are those two limits equal?
Indeed, they are not equal.
NOTE CONF
And why was the so.
I think that has something to do with uh with,
NOTE CONF
with this uh, the third option.
So the limit of the function as x approaches two
NOTE CONF
does not exist, as most of you correctly answered, because
these two limits, as x approaches, two from the left
NOTE CONF
and from the right are not equal.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And finally, the, uh, the value of f at two
Exists because, you know, despite the fact that we have
NOTE CONF
an uncoloured circle here.
Kind of like an empty circle here.
NOTE CONF
We have a nice full circle up there.
And in fact, we would be in trouble if they
NOTE CONF
were both coloured.
And why would we be in trouble in that case?
NOTE CONF
So you see, what I'm referring to is that we
have an empty circle here and a full, nicely filled
NOTE CONF
in circle here.
So why couldn't we have two fully coloured circles?
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
It would not be a function because it would have
two values at two.
NOTE CONF
So then f at the point two would be one
and three at the same time.
NOTE CONF
We're not allowed to have this.
If we are considering a function.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions about this?
This assignment?
NOTE CONF
No questions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's move on to the next.
I think you will need a.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So again we have a picture on this screen and
NOTE CONF
the option and the question on the screen and the
options on the screen.
NOTE CONF
I'll give you some time to think about it and
then we'll discuss it together.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, so the voting is still kind of going on,
NOTE CONF
but it has slowed down, uh, slowed down, uh, sufficiently
so because we have, uh, we need to move on
NOTE CONF
to the other question.
I will start discussing the answers with you.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so these are the, uh.
So.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We had to select all the statements that are correct.
NOTE CONF
So let's analyse this together.
Is this function continuous from the left at x equals
NOTE CONF
two.
Most of you said yes.
NOTE CONF
Uh, why?
Why is that true?
NOTE CONF
So in the previous question, we, uh, we, uh, discovered
that the limit of this function as X approaches two
NOTE CONF
from the left existed.
Right?
NOTE CONF
That's all we were interested in in that previous question.
We only wanted to know if the limit as X
NOTE CONF
goes to sorry approaches two on the left exists.
Is that enough for continuity on the left at that
NOTE CONF
point?
Is the existence of the limit from the left?
NOTE CONF
So as x approaches to on the left is the
existence of the limit at that point enough to claim
NOTE CONF
that the function is continuous at that point.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You can just nod or shake your head.
Do something.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
So we have a reluctant.
No.
NOTE CONF
And indeed that's true.
What else do we need for continuity?
NOTE CONF
What else?
What is missing?
NOTE CONF
No.
Don't look.
NOTE CONF
Not that.
It's not missing in this case.
NOTE CONF
But the question I asked was, is existence of the
limit enough?
NOTE CONF
And we said no, because we need something else.
And what is that?
NOTE CONF
Something else?
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it's not just.
It's not just enough that the limit exists at the
NOTE CONF
point, but it also has to equal to the to
the value of the function at that point.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Which is actually satisfied here.
NOTE CONF
So the value of the function at that point is,
uh, what is it?
NOTE CONF
It's three and the limit is three as well.
So we're good.
NOTE CONF
So when we when we approach X from the left,
sorry.
NOTE CONF
When we approach two from the left we get a
limit equals three.
NOTE CONF
And the value of the function at that point is
also three.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
Uh, what about the second option when we approach two
NOTE CONF
from the right?
Does the limit exist there?
NOTE CONF
The limit of the function as x approaches two from
the right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the limit of the function.
So the limit, not the value, but the limit of
NOTE CONF
the function as x approaches two from the right does
exist.
NOTE CONF
However, it does not equal the value of the function
at that point, right?
NOTE CONF
Because the value of the function at this point is
three, but this limit is one.
NOTE CONF
Is this clear?
So that's why the answer to the.
NOTE CONF
That's why this option is wrong.
As most of you correctly, uh, correctly indicated.
NOTE CONF
Well, why is this function not continuous at the point
two?
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
There's a gap.
NOTE CONF
In.
The.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yes, yes.
NOTE CONF
So that's very good indeed.
Because or in other words, because the limits don't match
NOTE CONF
exactly the limit of the function as x approaches two
from the left is not equal to the limit of
NOTE CONF
the function as x approaches two from the right.
So and for continuity.
NOTE CONF
At that point, we would need those limits to match
and to be equal to the value of the function
NOTE CONF
at that point.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
So I can show you the, the the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
And we will have another question similar to these.
Well you have to think about the continuity and let's
NOTE CONF
start thinking about it and voting.
And then we'll discuss it together.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the voting has slowed down.
Um, it's still going on, but it's very slow.
NOTE CONF
So let's, uh, maybe let's let's start discussing this, uh,
this question.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So most of you, uh, said false, uh, meaning the
NOTE CONF
function is not continuous at the point x equals four.
Um, why why is that?
NOTE CONF
Why did you choose that answer anyone?
Just.
NOTE CONF
You can just.
Yes, please.
NOTE CONF
Very good indeed.
Indeed.
NOTE CONF
So the the the answer is because the function is
not defined at the point for sorry at the point
NOTE CONF
x equals four.
So let's recall again for continuity we need two things.
NOTE CONF
Well two things.
And one of those two things contains like a little
NOTE CONF
sub thing.
So we need the limit at this point to exist.
NOTE CONF
And moreover we need the limit at that point to
equal the value of the function at that point which.
NOTE CONF
So the second condition requires the value of the function
at that point to exist as well.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we need two things.
NOTE CONF
We need the limit to exist, and we need that
limit to match the value of the function.
NOTE CONF
But what if the function is not even defined at
that point?
NOTE CONF
Which which is the case in this on this picture?
We don't know what this function is.
NOTE CONF
We don't know what the algebraic expression looks like.
And we don't care, because the graph tells us that
NOTE CONF
the function for some reason is not defined at that
point.
NOTE CONF
So we cannot even talk about continuity because, well, it's
just not defined at that point.
NOTE CONF
So which means that you choose the correct answer.
Very well done.
NOTE CONF
I'm afraid that's all the time we have for today.
Do you have if you have any questions about anything.
NOTE CONF
Come and ask otherwise.
See you next week.
NOTE CONF
Next.
Well, see you on Thursday.
NOTE CONF